Adding a FAQ on loop modifies (#3261)
dafny-lang/dafny: docs/HowToFAQ/FAQLoopModifies.md

- The loop also has an invariant, which has two conjuncts:
   - One conjunct states about the local variable `i`. Even though `i` is not in the modifies clause 
    it is an assignment target, so we need to say what is known about it (prior to the loop test).
   - The other conjunct talks about the elements of `a`, which depend on `i`, 
    that is, on how many iterations of the loop have been executed.
- After the loop, Dafny uses the loop invariant and the negation of the loop guard to conclude i == a.Length, and from that and the invariant, Dafny can prove the method's postcondition.

Even when Dafny can infer an appropriate modifies clause, it does not infer loop invariants, so the user always needs to supply those. 

Here is another example:
```dafny
class Counter {
  var n: nat
}

// print "hello" c.n times and then increment c.n
method PrintAndIncrement(c: Counter)
  modifies c
  ensures c.n == old(c.n) + 1
{
  for _ := 0 to c.n
    // To verify this method, the loop needs one of the following two lines:
    invariant c.n == old(c.n)
    modifies {} // empty modifies clause
  {
    PrintHello();
  }
  c.n := c.n + 1;
}

method PrintHello() {
  print "hello\n";
}
```

> The inner for-loop can be specified and the whole method verified in two different ways.

Reviewer: "inner"? The next paragraphs also speak of "inner".

---

> title: If I have an assertion about a class and a loop that doesn't mention (read, modify) the class, why does dafny fail to establish the assertion after the loop?

Author: Changed it - though the title is a quote from the original user question

---

## Question

If I have an assertion about a class and a loop that doesn't mention (read, modify) the class, 
why does dafny fail to establish the assertion after the loop?

## Answer

> The short answer is that you need an appropriate combination of modifies clause and 

Author: Fixed

loop invariants to prove assertions about the end result of a loop.

In Dafny's way of reasoning about a loop (which is typical of verifier systems), 
the loop invariant is the only thing you can assume at the top of every iteration. 
In other words, at the top of each loop iteration, it is as if all variables have 
arbitrary values, with the condition that the loop invariant is satisfied. 
Sometimes, the word _havoc_ is used to describe this: the verifier havocs all variables, 
that is, gives all variables arbitrary values, and then assumes the loop invariant.

If that’s all the verifier did, life would be a pain, because you’d have to write a l

> oop invariant about all variables in your program, even those that have nothing to do with the loop.

Reviewer: l + oop == loop

Author: Fixed

So, then, does this mean your loop invariant needs to speak about everything in the heap whenever the heap is an assignment target of the loop?

Again, no. Loops in Dafny have `modifies` clauses, just like methods do (and just like for methods, 
newly allocated objects are implicitly included in those `modifies` clauses). 
It would be a pain to even have to write `modifies` clauses for every loop, 
so if a loop does not have an explicit `modifies` clause, Dafny implicitly attaches 
the `modifies` clause of the enclosing method (or of the enclosing loop, in the case of nested loops). 
This default behavior turns out to be right in almost all cases in practice, 
which is why you normally don’t have to think about this issue.

But when it is not, you need to be explicit about the `modifies` clause and the loop invariants. 
In particular
- write a `modifies` clause for the loop that includes all objects whose fields might be 
assigned in the loop body (or listed in the modifies clauses of anything the loop body calls)
- then write a loop invariant that includes assertions about any variable that is listed in the modifies clause
or is an assignment target in the loop body. 

> Very typically, the invariant will give a value for a havoced variable showing its relationship to the loop index.

Reviewer: I think "each havoced variable" is better than "a havoced variable" here.

Author: Agreed

For example, a loop that sets the elements of an array to some initial value might look like this:
```dafny
method init(a: array<int>) 
  modifies a

>   ensures forall j | 0 <= j < a.Length :: a[j] == j;

Reviewer: No semi-colon at the end of this line

Author: Right

{

>   var i: int := 0;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  var i := 0;
```

>   while (i < a.Length) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  while i < a.Length
```

    modifies a

>     invariant 0 <= i <= a.Length && forall j | 0 <= j < i :: a[j] == j;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    invariant 0 <= i <= a.Length && forall j | 0 <= j < i :: a[j] == j
```

  {
    a[i] := i;

>     i := i+1;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    i := i + 1;
```

  }
}
```

Note the following points:
- The method specifies that it might modify the elements of the array `a`.
- The loop says that it modifies the same array. 
In fact that modifies clause could be omitted
because it would be inherited from the enclosing context

> - The loop also modifies `i`, but as `i` is a local variable of non-reference type, it need not be listed in the modifies clause.

Reviewer: Omit "of non-reference type". What is said holds for local variables of any type. (I think the comment is trying to get to that the _state_ referenced by a reference-type local variable may or may not be modified. But I think that's confusing to bring up here.)

Author: Edited as you suggest. Though I think I would be confused. Are you saying that a local variable of reference type nevoid not be in a modifies clause even if its state is changed?

Reviewer: All `modifies` clauses, for both methods and loops, always only talk about which parts of the heap are modified. If you want to modify a local variable in a loop, you just go ahead and do so--no specification needed, because Dafny will peer into the loop body and figure out which local variables may be modified.

- The loop also has an invariant, which has two conjuncts
   - One conjunct states what may be assumed about `i`. Even though `i` is not in the modifies clause 
    it is an assignment target, so we need to say what may be assumed about it (prior to the loop test)

>    - The other conjunct says what is known about the elements of `a`, which depends on `i`, 

Reviewer: "what may be assumed" and "what is known about" are confusing. They sound like there's no associated proof obligation. These conjuncts of the loop invariant state "what is intended to hold on loop boundaries (more precisely, what is intended to hold at the top of each iteration)". One way to modify these bullets would be to say
- One conjunct talks about the local variable `i`. ...
- The other conjunct talks about the elements of `a`. ...

Author: Revised

    that is, on how many iterations of the loop have been executed

> - And then from that loop invariant and the fact that the loop has now terminated (which implies that `i == a.Length`), Dafny can prove the method's postcondition. 

Reviewer: "has now terminated" can be improved. I suggest

- After the loop, Dafny uses the loop invariant and the negation of the loop guard to conclude `i == a.Length`, and from that and the invariant, Dafny can prove the method's postcondition.

Author: OK. (glossing over break statements in both formulations...)

> Even when Dafny can infer an appropriate modifies clause, it cannot infer loop invariants. The user always needs to supply those (until verification technology improves). 

Reviewer: What would you think of:

```suggestion
Even when Dafny can infer an appropriate modifies clause, it does not infer loop invariants, so the user always needs to supply those. 
```

Author: Fine
